[SQUEAKING]
[RUSTLING]
[CLICKING]
LAWRENCE GUTH: So
today is the last day
of our unit about
random walks on groups.
And the goal of the
day is to digest,
think about the Bourgain-Gamburd
theorem about mixing on SL2(Fp).
So we stated it at the
end of last time-- first,
I'll remember to remind
everybody what it says.
OK, so it's about
mixing on SL2(Fp).
So it says if mu is a
probability measure, SL2(Fp).
Actually, maybe it
doesn't matter that much.
But maybe we set it
in terms of subsets.
OK, so the question is,
when does the random walk
coming from A mix?
So then the conclusion will be,
the singular value of this walk
is less than 1
minus C of epsilon,
meaning that it does mix.
OK.
And to see that this
happens, we need
to know that A doesn't
lie in any subgroup.
And so we have a hypothesis
that's related to that.
It says that for any Borel
subgroup B, A intersect gB--
so any g in our group.
This guy is bounded
by K of epsilon p
to the minus epsilon times A.
So only a small fraction of A
lies in any coset
of a Borel group.
OK.
And we put in parentheses
that A is symmetric.
We don't really need it, but it
also doesn't matter that much.
And it will make things
a little cleaner.
Yeah.
AUDIENCE: I have a question
about the difference
between using a subset
versus a measure.
Is it possible to pass
between the two cases
by weighting by
different subgroup sets?
LAWRENCE GUTH:
Yeah, that's right.
So the question was, what's
the difference between taking
a subset or taking a measure?
I think there's not
that much difference.
I think if you can use
this as a black box
and prove things
about measures, I
think we also could just use
measures through the whole proof
and it would work fine.
OK.
So the proof of this theorem
breaks into two important pieces
which are both
interesting and which
are both connected in different
ways to themes of our class.
OK.
So the first part says that
if you just have pretty much
any set and you do
this random walk,
the only way it
can fail to mix is
if it gets stuck
in something which
is approximately a subgroup.
So it can fail to
mix if it's literally
contained in a subgroup.
And a little bit
more generally, it
can only fail to mix if
there's a set which is a lot
like a subgroup which contains a
lot of the mass of the measure.
So let's try to write this down.
So this is probably
true for any group.
I'm going to write it
for SL2(Fp) for now.
And then as we
talk about it more,
let's keep our eyes open
of what we actually used.
This is symmetric.
And sigma 1 TA is
bigger than 1 minus--
sorry.
Here I'll put 1 minus epsilon.
And then there exists some kind
of approximate subgroup called
H. Yeah, hold on.
Let me adjust it a little bit.
Let me also say that
A is pretty big.
It is not too tiny.
Then there exists some H so that
mu tensored to some power of H
is pretty big.
And this H is sort of like a
subgroup in the following sense.
So H, if you multiply it
by itself many times--
for example, 5.
You could do more.
This is less than p to
the O of delta times
H. And H also is not too big.
OK, so if you had
another group, you
would have to
adjust these things.
But I think that that's minor.
I think that's all you
would have to change.
OK.
So if you have a set which
is a decent sized fraction
of our group-- and let's
say it's symmetric--
then either that random walks
mixes or there is some subset
which is sort of like a group.
And when you take K steps
of your random walk,
you have a high probability
of being in this set.
And this set is sort of
like a group in this sense.
OK.
All right.
And so there's
delta and epsilon.
Maybe at the beginning
I should say this.
And delta depends on epsilon.
And it's positive.
All right.
Any questions or
comments about theorem 1?
That's theorem 1, is Bourgain
and Gamburd, essentially.
Yeah.
AUDIENCE: Where does the
A to the 2.5 come from?
LAWRENCE GUTH: Yeah.
So what's significant
here is just
that this is significantly
smaller than the whole group.
And if we-- yeah.
AUDIENCE: Does it equal
kind of a power on the side
of [INAUDIBLE]?
LAWRENCE GUTH: Right.
OK.
So this comes last
time from this--
so actually, it's also important
that this is bigger than 2.
So we had this important
property of SL2(Fp), that it's--
ah yeah, so actually this
wouldn't work for any group.
So we have this
important property
for SL2(Fp) from last time, that
every non-trivial representation
has a large dimension.
And that had the property that
if this thing had a small L2
norm, so it was kind of
decently well mixed, then
we would get a spectral gap.
And then if you kept going,
it would become really, really
well-mixed.
And that's crucially
being used here.
And so here you could put
anything bigger than 2.
And the point is
that it can only
go wrong by getting stuck in
something of size really smaller
than p squared.
Because we know once it's
spread over something of size
bigger than p squared, then
it's going to keep going
and spread all the way.
Yeah, thanks.
Yeah.
OK.
Well, this theorem
raises a question.
Who are all the subsets
H that are like this?
It becomes a much
nicer theorem when
we can write them
all down, or at least
say something
meaningful about them.
So theorem 2' says
something about that.
So this theorem is
due to Helfgott.
And it builds on Hrushovski.
OK.
So it says if H is
a subset of SL2(Fp)
and it has these two
properties, so all of this stuff
is smaller than p to
the delta H. And H
is at least p to the epsilon.
You can read that off from here.
It's not going to get stuck
in something smaller than A.
And at most, p to the 2.5.
Then the conclusion is that H is
concentrated in a Borel subgroup
or Borel coset.
So then there exists
a Borel subgroup B
of an element g in our
group, so that H intersect
B is bigger than some
small constant times H.
So our approximate
subgroups basically have
to sit in a Borel subgroup.
This isn't a complete
classification
because some of the subsets of
B are approximate subgroups,
and many of them aren't,
but it's a meaningful piece
of information.
OK, cool.
So you put these two
theorems together, you
can prove that theorem
pretty quickly.
Yeah.
AUDIENCE: This C, does
it depend on anything,
or is it a universe?
LAWRENCE GUTH: Does
it depend on anything?
Let's put this here.
Let's see.
I have all these
epsilons and deltas.
I don't think it
depends on anything.
So I guess here,
there should be this.
So we can do this.
So this is getting stronger
as epsilon is getting smaller.
Epsilon is telling us that
our thing is not too small.
And then I think that
this is just a constant.
I guess that does suggest that
we could have said something
stronger up there.
Yeah.
Oh, this is definitely H,
not B. I think it's right.
Yeah.
AUDIENCE: It's a question
about the choice of g.
If the H is a symmetric
subset, would that kind of
imply that the
optimal g is always
going to just be the identity?
Because you think of
H is kind of being
centered in some way around.
There would be some shifting
subgroup by kind of an identity
element, wouldn't
change the intersection?
LAWRENCE GUTH: Yeah.
So the question is, maybe
if H were itself symmetric,
which in fact, I think
will happen in this setup,
then maybe you
don't need this g.
And maybe it's actually
only actual subgroups.
I think that may be.
So let me just scribe that
I'm not sure we need g.
Right.
Yeah, so a good
example to think about
is if you just take a
coset of a Borel subgroup.
And in the abelian world,
a coset of a subgroup
will be very small when
you add it to itself.
But in the non-abelian
world it's not so clear.
So I'll make a remark.
If H is a coset of
a Borel group, then
how big is just H times H?
Well, it's g times
B times g times B.
And because it's
not commutative,
I can't bring this across.
So it's not obvious
that this is small.
So I think this
is, in fact, large.
So based on that, I think it's
likely that we don't need this.
But it makes the proof
a little shorter.
OK, cool.
So I have a couple of
big-picture comments about this.
One comment is let's compare
to the perhaps simpler
setting of an abelian group.
So maybe you have
the group of integers
or the group of
integers modulo p.
Suppose we had a
subset in there that
had this property
and this property.
So when you add it
to itself, many times
it expands, but only by a
little bit by a small power
of the size of the set.
Then what can we say about
the structure of such things?
That's a big open problem
in additive combinatorics.
That's the
Freiman-Ruzsa problem.
If you have something even
smaller here, like log p or so,
then there would
be a classification
that would have to look like
a generalized arithmetic
progression.
But in this range,
there's not a whole lot.
There's nothing like
a structure theorem
that currently
exists in this range.
So in a certain sense, this
is stronger information
in the non-commutative
world than we
have in the commutative world.
Of course, you might
point out that this is not
a complete structure
theorem either.
But this is a
really strong piece
of information about our group.
And I think in some
ways, it's stronger
than any of what we in
the commutative work.
Yeah.
Another comment.
So I'm not sure.
So Hrushovski and Heathcote
both worked on this.
Hrushovski came from logic.
And I think that he was
interested in the idea
from the point of view of logic
of an approximate subgroup,
like a basic thing
we have axioms
for is that the
axioms for a group
and what happens if you relax
those axioms a little bit?
What can you say?
So an interesting question from
the point of view of logic.
OK, cool.
All right.
So the goal for the class is
to discuss each of these things
in moderate depth, probably
without giving complete proofs.
And they have quite
different ideas.
But in both cases, the ideas are
related to stuff in our class.
So first, let's talk
about theorem 1.
So theorem 1.
So we start with the
measure mu, which
is mu A. And we notice
that mu L2 squared is
1 over the size of a.
So that's is at most p
to the minus epsilon.
Because it was built
into our assumptions here
that A is at least
p to the epsilon.
Now, let's start
convolving mu with itself.
And we want to see if we
convolve it with itself
enough times is what will
happen to the L2 norm.
So let's say mu 2--
so that's called this mu 1.
Mu 2 is mu 1
convolved with mu 1.
And in general, mu k plus 1
is mu k convolved with mu k.
So we're convolving with this
thing with itself many times.
And we're going to see what
happens to the L2 norm.
So recall that if
at some point mu k
L2 squared were to be smaller
than 1 over p to the 2.1, then
we would get that sigma 1 of
T mu k was bounded by this.
And then we would get
that sigma 1 of T mu.
So mu k is mu convolved with
itself 2 to the k times.
So that would be p to the minus
1 over 10 times 2 to the k.
So if k is not too big, we
would get a spectral gap.
So that's our plan.
We keep doing
these convolutions,
and we watch what
happens to the L2 norm.
At every step, maybe the L2
norm goes down significantly.
In that case, we're happy.
Or maybe it doesn't go down.
In that case, we're stuck.
The stuck situation, we'll try
to analyze it carefully, and see
that the stuck situation
only arises because
of this structure, this setup.
So let me write that out.
So let's say G
stands for our goal
all, which is that mu k
L2 squared is less than 1
over p to the 2.1.
If we get there, we're happy.
p will stand for progress.
We're not necessarily there,
but mu k plus 1 L2 squared
is bounded by p to the
minus delta mu k L2 squared.
And then S stands
for stuck, which
means we're not at our goal.
And we are not making progress.
Not goal and not progress.
OK.
Cool.
So as long as we
don't get stuck,
we will reach our goal in
about over delta steps.
So if S never happens,
we reach the goal
and thus the over delta steps.
And no matter what delta is,
delta is just a large constant.
And that is enough to
give the conclusion.
So then if you do a little
calculation using this,
you'll get a spectrum.
So suppose we do get
stuck, let's think
about what that means.
So there was a comment at
the beginning of the class
that perhaps there's
not a big difference
between a set and a measure,
because if you have a set,
you can turn it into a measure.
If you have a measure,
you can look at the points
where the measure is pretty
big, and you get a set.
And that's actually
what we're going to do.
So let's say that
A lambda of mu k
is the set of group
elements for our group
SL2 Fp, where mu k of g
is approximately lambda.
So we can decompose
our group into pieces
where mu k has various sizes.
And one of these sizes
must have a decent fraction
of the measure.
So we choose lambda so that
mu k of A lambda is around 1.
So we've cut our whole group
into maybe logarithmically
many pieces.
Their total measure is 1.
So one of them has
to be pretty big.
All right.
Now let's say Ak is
defined to be this set.
So what we've learned is that
mu k is roughly uniform on Ak.
And Ak has a good fraction
of the total measure of mu.
OK, great.
So more or less, you could
imagine that mu k is just
the uniform measure on Ak.
All right.
So now what would we
learn algebraically
about Ak from the fact
that we are stuck?
It actually has a
nice interpretation
in terms of a previous
character in our course, which
was the idea of energy.
So let's recall what
energy means and put it
in a non-commutative context.
And we'll see that
it exactly fits here.
So let's say if we
have two subsets
A and B in our group,
the energy of A, B
is the number of a1, a2, b1, b2.
These guys are in
A, and these guys
are in B, so that a1 times b1
is the same as a2 times b2.
Energy A, B. Now this
is the same definition
that we saw before in the
context of a commutative group.
Our group is now
not commutative,
which means that it matters what
order I wrote those things in.
And so it matters what order
I wrote those things in.
So E A, B is not actually
the same as E B, A.
But at least, otherwise it's a
very similar-looking definition.
We can relate this
to this setup.
We can notice that E A, B is--
I take the characteristic
function of A,
and I convolve it with the
characteristic function of B.
When I do that, If I
evaluate this at G,
it will tell me how many
ways are there to write G
as little a times little b.
Now I'm going to
square it because I
want to have how many ways--
I have that many
choices for this
and that many choices for that,
and sum over B. So this is this.
OK.
So notice I took something.
I convolved it by something
else, and I took its L2 norm.
That's the character that's
involved in being stuck.
So something we can say.
Actually, before we do that, let
me make a little normalization.
So remark.
E A is in between A
cubed and A squared.
The A squared comes from--
I could take these
to be equal, and I
could take those to be equal.
And A cubed upper bound
comes from once I've
chosen these three,
there's at most
one choice for the last one.
So these ones have a lot
of additive structure.
And the typical example
is an actual subgroup.
And these have very little
additive structure Now
let's relate to being stuck.
So if we are in the stuck case
for mu k, then we could see--
all right, I don't
want to write this.
So mu k is
essentially 1 over Ak,
its characteristic
function of Ak.
And if we want to
be rigorous, I guess
we could say
something like this.
If we say mu k convolved
with mu k is larger than p
to the minus delta mu k,
this is equivalent to saying
that the energy, Ak with
Ak, is smaller than some p
to the delta times Ak cubed.
Claim if we unwind
this, we'll get this.
So we unwind this, we'll see
an energy, the energy of Ak.
This is almost the minimum
possible value of the L2 norm.
And so it's almost the--
sorry, it's almost the--
this goes the other way.
So let me say that again.
So this is encoding this energy.
It's a lower bound for it.
And the lower bound is almost
the biggest it could be.
So this energy is almost
Yes.
AUDIENCE: There could be a k
squared if it's a lower bound
for energy.
LAWRENCE GUTH: Right.
No, it's Ak cubed.
And this is a minus sign.
So this is possible.
Yeah.
So this just got copied there.
All right.
OK, so if you look
at this L2 norm,
these are probability measures.
So this L2 norm is
at most that L2 norm.
So when you look
at this inequality,
this L2 norm is really pinched.
It's at least a small fraction.
It's at least a large
fraction of mu L2 squared
and it's at most mu L2 squared.
So it's just about as
big as it could be.
So this energy is just
about as big as it could be.
OK.
Cool.
All right.
So if we get stuck, there must
be a subset of very high energy.
And that is a step towards
being an approximate subgroup.
But it's not as strong as
the conclusion of theorem 1.
So at this point, the story
connects to some characters
that we talked about when
we were doing projection
theory over finite fields.
It relates to the
Balog-Szemerédi-Gowers theorem
and the Plünnecke-Ruzsa
inequality.
So first of all, let me
just recall what they
said in the commutative case.
And then this is a
non-commutative case.
So then we'll have
to talk about what's
actually true in the
non-commutative case.
So recall that if we
have A contained in Z,
a commutative group, then we
have two important theorems,
Balog-Szemerédi-Gowers.
Balog-Szemerédi-Gowers says
that if A has a lot of energy,
then it has a large subset.
And the large subset
actually has a small subset.
So this set has added a
structure in one sense,
but it has a large
subset which has added
structure in a stronger sense.
And then once we have this--
so another important theorem,
the Plünnecke-Ruzsa theorem that
says if A prime plus A prime,
smaller than L times A prime--
so L will be this--
then you can also look at
the sum of three of them,
or four of them, or whatever.
So I'll just write this guy
is bounded by L to the 5th.
You could put other things.
You get the idea.
This sequence of
theorems is important
because it gives
amplification of structure.
So this assumption is that A
has some additive structure
and some fairly weak sense.
And that implies that a big
subset has additive structure
in a stronger sense.
And then therefore, it
has additive structure
in even stronger sense.
So if we were allowed to just
apply these two theorems, then
from this moment, we would get
the conclusion of theorem 1.
Conclusion of theorem
1 would be that there
is some set H, which could
have been Ak, which obeys this.
We can't do that because this
is for a commutative group.
So we need to talk
about what happens
in a non-commutative group.
But I thought it was--
we'll talk about that.
But I also thought it was a nice
moment to recall these theorems
and really appreciate that
they're important and useful
and do something kind of neat.
Halfway through the
course, check-in email.
When I asked people
what things that we did,
do you feel like they really
sunk in and you understood them
and what things would feel
it was maybe hard to remember
what actually was happening?
this theorem in particular
was cited as something
where it was hard--
people did not feel like they
remembered very well what
actually happened.
OK, so we get to
talk about it again.
Cool.
Yeah.
Oh, I guess another thing
you might wonder is,
OK, this logically is
stronger than this,
but does it really matter.
Later when we look at theorem
2, we'll have a good example.
Theorem 2 really requires
this as an input.
So we'll see an
interesting example
of why you might want this.
Let's talk about the
Balog-Szemerédi-Gowers theorem.
So I will tell you--
yeah, I guess first
I should tell you
what is true in the
non-commutative world, which
really looks pretty
similar to this.
And then we'll actually
remember the proof a little bit
to see if we can get the proof
to sink in a little bit deeper.
OK.
So I'm going to erase this.
And what I want us to remember
is just that to finish theorem
1, what we need
is a good version
of Balog-Szemerédi-Gowers
and Plünnecke-Ruzsa
in the non-commutative world.
All right.
So theorem.
Non-commutative
Balog-Szemerédi-Gowers.
It says if A is a subset of
a group, G, and the energy
A A is at least k
inverse A cubed,
then there exists a
subset A prime in A
so that it's pretty big.
And there are a few
different things
we could write, but actually,
let me call this A tilde.
A tilde times A tilde
inverse is not too big.
It looks very little different.
But let's take this
opportunity to remember
how the proof worked, and
see if we can get it to sink
in a little bit more deeply.
All right, so proof sketch.
All right.
So remember that the energy A A
is the sum over all of our group
elements of r A A of G
squared, where r A A of G
is the number of pairs a1, a2
squared so that a1 a2 is g.
That's the energy.
So for the energy
to be large, there
must be a lot of group elements
g, where this is pretty large.
We'll call those
popular products.
So p, the set of
This is the set of g, where
r A A of G is greater than k
to the minus something times
the size of A. So the size of A
is the biggest it could be.
And so they're almost
as big as it could be.
So they're quite popular.
All right.
So it's an exercise to see that
if the energy is really big,
most of the energy actually
comes from popular products.
Energy A A is pretty much as--
it's more than 1/2 comes from.
So 1/2 of the energy of A
is less than the sum over g
in the popular
products of r A A of G.
If this is having
popular products,
that's almost equivalent
to having a lot of energy.
Those are basically
the same thing.
All right.
So then we'll do a little
thought experiment.
Suppose that every
product was popular.
Every product in
the product set of A
had the same number
of representations.
Well, that number
of representations
would have to be pretty large
because there's a lot of energy.
And that would tell us
that A times A was small.
So then we would be done,
and A tilde could just be A.
But that's not true
because it's not true
that every element
can be written
as a product in the
same number of ways.
So what we want to
do, we're hoping
to find a subset, A
tilde, so that all
the products in A tilde--
A tilde times A
tilde-- they all can
be written as a product
in lots of ways,
or something in that sphere.
So now let's make the
popular product to graph.
So the vertices are
G cross G, there's
a copy of G.
There's a copy of G.
And we put an edge
from A to B. So
edge from A to B if a times
B is a popular product.
Actually, this is
not a G by G graph.
This is an A by A graph,
taking elements of our set
and looking at their products.
Not every pair is
a popular product.
They might not all be popular,
but there are by hypothesis,
because there's a lot
of energy, there's
a lot of popular products.
So the number of
edges is at least--
there are lots of
edges in this graph.
A tilde is going to be
some subset over here.
And the good feature of A tilde
is that for every a1 and a2
both in A tilde,
there are many edges--
there are many paths.
So let me draw it.
So let's say this is
a1 and this is a2.
And then we're going to
think of paths of length 4
that go from a1 to a2.
So there are many or more than
something paths of length 4
that go from a1 to
a2 in our graph.
And how many?
Well, from a
typical point, there
are about maybe 1 over
k times A edges out.
And so we have A choices,
A choices, A choices.
And then we have to go to a2.
There was a graph
theory lemma that we
can choose a substantial
set, A tilde, here that
has all of these edges.
That was the hardest
part of the proof,
but it's exactly
the same as before.
It had nothing to do with
anything being commutative.
So at that part, I won't repeat.
So there was a lemma that
we can choose A tilde.
So this is true.
And A tilde is pretty big.
OK.
Cool.
So let's name everybody
in the middle here.
I name these.
Let me actually rename these.
I'll call these
A. A and A prime.
And then we go over
here to a1 to a2 to a3.
So we know a a1 is popular.
We know a2 times a1 is popular.
We know a2 times a3
is popular, and so on.
What this allows us to do
is to write A over A prime
in many different ways.
a over-- I have to be
careful because I'm
in a non-commutative group.
I think I want to write a.
Let's call this a tilde
a times a tilde inverse.
So that's a times a1.
And now I'll put a2
times a1 inverse.
And now I'll put a2 times a3.
And then I'll put a
tilde times a3 inverse.
So if we do this out--
so this guy here is
a1 inverse a2 inverse.
You can see cancelation,
cancelation.
And this guy here is a3
inverse, a tilde inverse.
Cancel that.
So that's this equality.
It's not difficult.
But we've written it
in terms of four guys
that are popular.
So this a2 times a1 is
not just a2 times a1,
it's a popular product.
It can be written in
many different ways.
So a times a tilde inverse can
be written as z1, z2 inverse--
or maybe p1, p2 inverse, p3, p4
inverse, where pi are popular.
This can be done in
many different ways.
And the number of choices for
the pi is at least A cubed.
So the conclusion
is that the size
of A tilde times A tilde
inverse is bounded by--
I'm going to choose
four popular guys.
So that's p to the 4th.
And then I have overcounted,
because each person has now
been represented A
cubed different ways,
and ignoring some factors of k.
And so that's A. OK.
So I remember the
first time I taught it
I struggled a little bit
with the intuition of this.
The first thing you might hope
to do is to choose A tilde,
so that every product in
A tilde can be is popular.
They all can be written
in many ways, just as
a product of two
things in A. And then
there are clearly
not so many of those.
But I think it's not
possible to do that.
It's not possible
to choose A tilde
where every one
of these products
is popular in that sense.
But by being a little
bit more flexible,
we've chosen A tilde so
that every quotient can
be written in many
ways, not just
as a quotient of
two things in A,
but many ways in this slightly
more flexible framework.
Any questions or comments?
Yeah.
AUDIENCE: So why can't you get
the same result for A times A
if you just choose
paths of length 3?
LAWRENCE GUTH: Yeah, I think
you could get the same result
for A times A if you
choose paths of length 3
or A times B. Yeah.
Sorry, I maybe was not
transparent about--
so the thing with paths
of length 3 still works.
I think that might produce
two different subsets.
Actually, maybe in
the commutative case,
I actually should have
had two different subsets.
At least initially.
It works fine.
The reason that I have A
tilde times A tilde inverse,
the motivation for that is
going to come in a moment.
And actually, I'm going
to try to argue that this
is better than A times A.
AUDIENCE: And just
to clarify anything,
the way you stated it before
the popular products here
is the subset of A times A,
with the small projection.
Because it was stated in
terms of a subset having
a large projection,
then that leads to--
you can choose A subset of
such that the subset is small.
LAWRENCE GUTH:
Yeah, that's right.
That's right.
So in the projection
theory version,
this would be the
small projection.
And there'd be some big piece
of A cross A that projects here.
Yeah, thanks.
Yeah.
OK.
Cool.
So this is the
non-commutative analog
of Balog-Szemerédi-Gowers.
It really looks a lot like
Balog-Szemerédi-Gowers.
And this inverse is
because we want it.
We probably could also have
had A tilde times B tilde
if we wanted.
The situation with
Plünnecke-Ruzsa is actually
a little bit more complicated.
So non-commutative.
All right.
So let's ask a question.
Suppose we have is A
as a subset of a group,
and A times A is small.
Does it imply that A
times A times A is small?
So this would be
that natural analog
of Plünnecke's inequality.
And the answer to this is no.
OK, here's the example.
So let's say H contained
in G is a subgroup.
And A is H union
one other element,
which is not in the subgroup.
Now what happens when
I take A times A?
A times A is H times
H-- that's good--
plus, or union, H times g union
g times H union g times g.
There's nothing
special about these.
But because g is only one
element, all of this stuff
is small.
So we can see that A
times A is smaller than--
1, 2, 3-- it's smaller
than 4A, probably 3A.
But now what happens when
I take A times A times A?
OK, now I have three factors.
And so that concludes
H times g times H.
In the non-commutative world,
I cannot slide this over.
And this is not so good.
There is no reason
for this to be small.
And so the size of
H times g times H
could well be the
size of H squared.
OK.
So that didn't work very well.
What to do about it.
There is a theorem that if
A times A times A is small,
then A times A times
A times A is small.
Yeah.
AUDIENCE: This is
the counterexample
that you have an
example in SL2 Fp?
LAWRENCE GUTH: Yeah, it does.
So H could be any subgroup,
say a Borel subgroup,
and G is not in there.
Yeah, this will happen.
So this could happen in SL2 Fp.
So here's a theorem
that if you assume
that a product of three
copies of A is small,
then the product of four
copies of A is also small.
But that theorem is not
immediately useful to us
because we don't have any input
that a product of three things
is small.
There's another fix to this--
let's just suppose
think about this example
and how we might fix it.
So this example has a lot
of algebraic structure.
This is the algebraically
structured part,
and this is garbage.
And it would be
helpful to separate A
into the structured
part and the garbage.
So how might we do that?
So let's look at--
so this is the continuing
in the example.
Let's look at A times A inverse.
You could do a times-- anyway,
it works a little bit better
for A times A inverse.
So what do we have?
We have H times
H. Actually, yeah,
so we will eventually
look at A times A inverse,
but let's think about how
we might separate this.
So this set has
different pieces.
And if we want to separate
the algebraic part
from the garbage--
so we'd like to find this
part and distinguish it
from that part.
How are they different
from each other?
Well, let's think about
how many representations
there are for each product
in this product set.
Any product in here has
many, many representations,
and the products here have
only one representation.
So this guy here is the
set of popular products.
And actually, once
we identified it,
the popular product set
then is an actual subgroup.
It has a lot of
algebraic structure.
Now let that motivate the
following proposition,
which is an analog of p.
So it says if A times A inverse
is less than or equal to KA--
so A inverse, that means
take each element of
and take its inverse.
And then if Q is the set of
popular quotients, so it's
the set of g so that r A A
inverse of g is bigger than K
to the something A. Then you can
raise Q to any power you like.
Q, let's say, we do it L times.
Q has a lot of
algebraic structure,
and the proof has a similar
idea of writing things
in many different ways.
So proof.
OK.
Oh, actually, I think
it's a little bit tricky.
I think it should be that.
So the proof is let's look at
A times Q times Q is Q. Say,
I'll illustrate the
proof, and L2 equals 4.
Let's illustrate
with L equals 3.
That'll give you the
idea, times A inverse.
So somebody in here can
be written as little a.
And now this is a
popular quotient.
So this is little a2
inverse little a3.
And there are many choices.
And then actually let's
illustrate with L equals 2.
And then here, we'll have
little a4 inverse little a5.
We have many choices here.
How many choices we have, about
A choices, of about A choices.
And then at the
end, I'll do this.
a6 inverse a7 about A traces.
And then a8 inverse.
All right.
So to say more better
what I'm saying,
suppose that I have an
element of this set.
Then I can write the
element this way.
And so I can say that x
belongs to A A inverse.
So x can be written as--
all right.
So x can be written in
many different ways.
And for each way of
writing it, we'll
notice that this guy
lives in A A inverse,
that guy lives in A
A inverse and so on.
So it can be written in around a
cubed ways is as b1, b2, b3, b4,
where the bi are in A A inverse.
OK.
So the size of this set,
this is bounded by the size
of A A inverse to the fourth.
So I get to choose these B's.
And now I've overcounted
because for each x,
there are around A cubed
different choices of how
I could write it.
Divided by A cubed.
And that is smaller than A.
OK.
There's one thing I
hid at the beginning.
Let me do it properly and then
pause and see what people think.
So we were given A times
A inverse is small.
And that implies that the
energy of A A inverse is large.
This is stronger than this.
And now I'd like
to switch these.
And this is actually
the same as this.
So even though I don't know
A inverse times A is small,
I do know that A inverse
A has a lot of energy.
And the reason I can switch
them is if I have a1 a2 inverse
equals a3 a4 inverse,
that's a quadruple that's
being counted in this energy.
Let's just rearrange things
a little bit divide by a3.
a3 inverse a1, a2 inverse
equals a4 inverse.
Then I will multiply
on the right by a2.
So that's a quadruple
that's being counted here.
Yeah.
AUDIENCE: Did you know
that A inverse A has
to be small because it's
just the inverse of element
in A inverse or A A inverse?
LAWRENCE GUTH: Yeah,
maybe that's true.
Yeah, maybe I made
this too complicated.
So these are equal,
but you claim
that actually A inverse
times A is A times A inverse.
So over here, I
have a1 a2 inverse.
If I invert it, if I
invert that, I get--
what's the inverse of this?
So invert this one.
I don't think this quite works.
AUDIENCE: No, you didn't.
LAWRENCE GUTH: So
I didn't manage
to switch the order
when I did that,
but I can switch the order
when I look at the quadruple.
OK, good try.
This is large.
So therefore, there are
lots of popular quotients.
So Q is large, which
is what we used here.
Both of these proofs have
following high-level idea.
There's a lot of energy around.
So it frequently
happens that you
can write a product or a
quotient in many different ways.
If you could arrange a set where
every product could be written
in many ways, then you
could get a clean estimate
for the size of the product set.
By playing around with the sort
of products that you consider
and by some experience
and craft and skill,
we can get that to happen.
OK, so this is the analog
of Plünnecke's inequality.
The reason that it was desirable
to put A tilde A tilde inverse
in Balog-Szemerédi-Gowers is
that that thing is designed
to fit into this thing.
So this Q is the
approximate subgroup
that we were looking for, which
is, the conclusion of theorem 1.
So this finishes the
discussion of theorem 1.
There's a pretty
detailed proof sketch.
And it is a somewhat
different setup that shows
the significance of the idea
of Balog-Szemerédi-Gowers
and Plünnecke-Ruzsa in
these combinatorial methods.
OK, so now in the 15
minutes that's left,
I'm going to try to say a little
bit about the proof of theorem
2.
The proof of theorem
2, it also connects
with themes of the
class, and especially
with how some estimates
are different in the case
of a prime field or the
case of a non-prime field.
OK.
So let's have some let's
do discussion of theorem 2.
All right, I'd like to put us
in the following framework.
We're going to look
at SL2 of k, bar
where k bar is an
algebraically closed field.
You could imagine it's the
algebraic closure of Fp.
All right, and
we're going to look
at subgroups of SL2 of k bar.
Let's remember some easy ones.
A subgroup like this where A
and A inverse are in this field.
We have the Borel subgroup.
So that's A A inverse t.
And we have the
unitary subgroup.
So those are some subgroups.
We can take conjugates of them.
Actually, let me
come back to that.
So then we could do
two general things.
We can look at subfields.
So I can take SL2 k,
where k contained in k bar
is a subfield.
Or you could take this
any of with a subfield.
Those are subgroups.
And you could take conjugates.
So conjugate any subgroup
you get, another subgroup.
So that is a bunch
of subgroups that we
can identify without
too much trouble that
sit inside of SL2 of k bar.
There is a theorem that says
that this is not exactly,
but reasonably close
to the fullest.
Dickson in 1901 gave
a full classification
of these subgroups.
It's a little bit messy.
It includes a variety of finite
subgroups in certain cases
and so on.
His theorem implies that
if H is an actual subgroup,
then either H is contained in
a conjugate of SL2 k, where
k is a subfield, or most of H is
contained in a conjugate of L.
If we know from the
beginning that we're
talking about a subgroup of SL2
of Fp, a proper subgroup of SL2,
Fp, it eliminates
the first case.
So we must be in
the second case.
All right.
But Dickson's methods are--
some of them, at least,
are not very robust
if you replace the
hypothesis of being
an actual subgroup by something
like H times H times H times H
times H is pretty small.
So here's a common
example of a technique
that we use to
classify subgroups
that does not do very
well if we replace it
by approximate subgroups.
Example is there's the
order of the subgroup
divides the order of the group.
That's really useful in 18.701.
You want to classify the
subgroups of subgroup
with eight elements.
But something like
that is not going
to survive an approximate
subgroup in any useful way.
OK.
So the proof of
theorem 2 is based
on a rather different strategy
for this classification.
That's due to Larsen and Pink.
So let me say part A, which is
the Larsen and Pink strategy.
All right.
So we're going to think about
how a subgroup intersects
these subgroups.
So if you take SL2 k and you
intersect it with one of these,
it will either be empty, or
just be identity or something
like that, or it will be a
subgroup that's like T0 of k.
So we're going to study H
intersected with T of k bar,
H intersected with B of k bar,
H intersected with U of k bar.
And we'll see the
following behavior.
The H intersected with T of
k bar is roughly H to the 1/3
or big O of 1.
So if I take SL2 Fp and
I intersect it with this,
I'll get T0 of Fp.
It'll be about p of those,
which is about the cube
root of the size of SL2 Fp.
If I take some crazy torus
in the algebraic closure
that may not intersect
except at the identity.
So these are the two
things that could happen.
And then similarly with these.
So they first proved that if
you take an arbitrary group
and you consider
how it intersects
these kind of fundamental
algebraic subgroups,
then it behaves a lot like
it were SL2 of a subfield.
And then building
from this, they
were able to see that
actually, it would
have to be SL2 of a subfield.
So that's their approach to
the rough classification.
Yeah, so this was a cool
paper in pure group.
They weren't interested
in approximate subgroups.
They were interested in
pure group theory problem,
classifying subgroups
of SLD of k,
or other like groups
over finite fields.
The complete classification
is clearly hard
because any finite group embeds
in a permutation group which
embeds an SLD of Fp.
So all finite groups occur
as subgroups of SLD of Fp
for some D and some p.
And so it's not really
plausible to give
a complete classification,
or anyway, it
would be at least as hard
as classifying finite groups
to give a complete
classification,
but they were able
to classify, I
think it's subgroups
of SLD of Fp, which
have at least some size,
like p to the epsilon
or epsilon times D or something
like this, the ones that
are decently large.
That Was in around 2000.
So this really is a hard thing.
But it also turns out that
their method interacts
well with just assuming that
H times H times H times H
is small.
So here, this whole
argument works
if we just assume that H times
H times H times H times H
is equal to H. OK.
I may or may not
have two minutes
to try to describe what they
did, how this part works.
AUDIENCE: Significance
of the algebraic closure.
If we only care about
subgroups of SL2 Fp,
what information are you
gaining from intersecting with--
LAWRENCE GUTH: Yeah,
so the question is,
Why bring into play
the algebraic closure?
AUDIENCE: Also, what is the
algebraic closure of Fp?
LAWRENCE GUTH: And what is
the algebraic closure of Fp?
Yeah.
You do need this for the
following reason that
should be familiar to
us even as analysts.
So suppose you have
a matrix in SL2 r,
and you would like
to diagonalize it.
You'd like to look at its
eigenvalues, or whatever.
Well, you can't necessarily
do that in SL2 r,
because the eigenvalues
could be complex.
So in order to diagonalize it,
you might want to move to SL2 c.
And diagonalizing
matrices is useful
because you can
classify matrices
by their Jordan canonical form.
And this is a convenient
way to organize things.
That's the same thing
that's going on here.
AUDIENCE: The intersections
look the same, though.
The intersection of if H is
just a subgroup of SL2 of k,
then the intersection
with T k bar
is the same as the
intersection of T k.
LAWRENCE GUTH: Yeah,
that's correct.
That's correct.
But OK, so the
comment was that if--
so what did this--
so if H is in SL2 k,
then H intersected
with T0 of k bar
is the same thing as H
intersected with T0 of k.
Yeah.
OK.
I think the problem
with is that I
forgot to say something about
what's written on the board
here.
This T is not T0.
The conjugates are
really important.
So T of k bar is a
conjugate of T0 of k bar.
Yeah.
AUDIENCE: Are the elements
that are being diagonalized
just elements of SL2 or
bigger linear operators
responding to SL2?
I think if it's just SL2, you
only need a degree-2 extension.
LAWRENCE GUTH: Yeah.
So the comment is
that if we just
want to diagonalize
matrices in SL2 Fp,
we probably only need a degree-2
extension of Fp, which we might
feel more comfortable with.
I think that's probably right.
I think we could probably work
with the degree-2 extension.
OK.
All right.
So the output of the Larsen-Pink
argument is after conjugating.
Yeah, so first of
all, we can arrange
that our H intersected with
some unitary guy, is pretty big.
After conjugating, we can
arrange that this is U0 of k.
So H contains some guys like
this, where T is in some subset
that I'll call E.
And E is pretty big.
Moreover, this part
should not expand
too much when we take products.
So here, let's call this
thing a unitary piece of H.
UH times UH, also, this
isn't completely obvious,
but it's not that
difficult. It shouldn't
be that much bigger than.
And that tells us that E
plus E shouldn't be that much
bigger than E.
Also, we should have
this U is in some B, and
H intersect B of k bar.
So we've already
conjugated so that U is U0.
So this is going to be B0.
And this should be
around H to the 2/3.
Inside of there, we'll have a T.
And H intersect that should be
like H to the 1/3.
So H intersect T0 k bar.
That's going to be some
guys that look like this.
And these A's live
in some set that I'll
call F. So then if you think
about how these matrices act
on these matrices,
we should get--
so T0-- so let's called this
guy the T part of H. And U,
say, here.
Well, OK.
This thing here is
the B part of H.
So the B part of H
times the B part of H
should be not that much
bigger than the B part of H.
And if you unwind what that
means, you multiply these,
you'll have things like a a
inverse at, where a is an F,
t is an E. So the conclusion
is that E times F is also not
that much bigger than E or F.
So in other words, once you
have a unipotent piece where
you have these guys, then
this multiplication operation
just gives you addition
of the numbers in here.
So you have a simpler thing.
And then once you have a bunch
of upper triangular guys,
then this matrix
multiplication induces
this regular multiplication,
and we have small products.
This is consistent
with the possibility
that E and F could both
be just some subfield k
or some approximate subfield.
But the sum product
theorem says that Fp
has no approximate subfields.
And so the subproduct theorem
rules out the possibility
that this could happen.
So the conclusion is
the sum product theorem
applies that this can't happen.
What's on the board?
Let me I should add one thing.
So we're going to assume that H
is not contained in a Borel guy.
So this whole
thing that wouldn't
be true for the Borel subgroup.
It's only true.
Once we assume that our subgroup
is not contained in Borel,
and then we get this.
And that tells us that the
intersection sizes have
to match SL2 of a subfield.
And then if you
look more carefully
at the matrices that appear
in the intersections,
you see that the
entries there have
to be kind of like a subfield.
And then it becomes a
question of whether there
are approximate subfields.
OK.
Let me say it one more time, and
then we will break for the week.
So the theorem says that if you
have a subgroup, which is not
pretty much contained in
a Borel subgroup, then
it must be SL2 of a subfield.
It's going to be
true for subgroups,
but it's also true for
approximate subgroups.
So imagine we have an
approximate subgroup,
we're going to
gradually prove that it
has more and more properties
of SL2 over a finite field.
So the first property
we will consider
is how it intersects
various algebraic subgroups
of SL2 of k bar.
The sizes of those
intersections behave
in a way that matches
what you would
expect from SL2 of a subfield.
There's a substantial thing
to say about this proof
that we won't have time
to do in this class.
But once you know
that, these subgroups
are useful because
the matrices in here
are simpler than
general 2 by 2 matrices.
So the unitary subgroup has
matrices that look like this.
And when you multiply
them, you just
add the upper right hand corner.
And so now if you just look at
these upper right-hand corners,
you see that adding
those numbers
doesn't change very much.
That's a property of a subfield.
So it's behaving
like a subfield.
And the upper diagonal matrices,
the multiplication rule
is only a little bit
more complicated.
It's a pretty simple mix of
multiplication and addition.
So you could see that
these diagonal entries,
they should be almost
closed under multiplication.
And they interact
with each other.
And so you would get
something like this.
Anyway, all those
things being consistent
algebraically with
being a subfield.
OK, yeah.
AUDIENCE: Could we use 2.5?
LAWRENCE GUTH: Where
did we use 2.5?
Yeah, that's a good question.
Actually, I don't see
where we used that here.
Yeah, we used that here.
So at the end, we have to say
E and F cannot be approximately
a subfield.
And that requires that they're
significantly smaller than Fp.
So if you take Fp and you
remove two or three elements,
it is almost closed under
addition and multiplication.
So this could happen
then if you were allowed
to take a really large subset of
Fp, a really large subset of SL2
Fp.
OK, cool.
I apologize for going over.
Thanks for your patience.
Have a good weekend.
I will see you next week.